feat(docs): Add how-to guide on building custom plugin (#1306)
kestra-io/docs: content/docs/15.how-to-guides/build-custom-plugin.md

---
title: How to Build Custom Plugin in Kestra
icon: /docs/icons/tutorial.svg
---

In this tutorial, we will be building a custom plugin in Kestra.

## Use-case for Custom Plugin

We will be building a plugin that fetches the data for a given pokemon. We will use the API provided by [PokeAPI.co](https://pokeapi.co/) to fetch the pokemon's details: `https://pokeapi.co/api/v2/pokemon/{pokemon_name}`.

The API provides detailed information about any pokemon. We will fetch a few fields like the ability names, base experience, height and move names, and showcase it in the output of our plugin. The plugin task will accept the pokemon name, and return the selected fields in the output. This is how the task should look:

```yaml
id: fetch_details
type: io.kestra.plugin.pokemon.Fetch
pokemon: pikachu
```

## Requirements

> You would need the following installed on your machine before proceeding:

Author: ```suggestion
You will need the following installed on your machine before proceeding:
```

```groovy
jar {
    manifest {
        attributes(
                "X-Kestra-Name": project.name,
                "X-Kestra-Title": "Pokemon",
                "X-Kestra-Group": project.group + ".pokemon",
                "X-Kestra-Description": project.description,
                "X-Kestra-Version": project.version
        )
}
}

## Develop Fetch Task

### Create Pokemon class

In `src/main/java/io/kestra/plugin/pokemon`, we will create a new class `Pokemon.java`. This will be used to map the JSON output of the pokemon API to the Java class. We only need to add the fields that we are interested in, and ignore the rest.

::collapse{title="Here is how the Pokemon.java file should look like"}
```java
package io.kestra.plugin.pokemon;

import java.util.*;
import lombok.*;

@Data
public class Pokemon {
  List<DetailedAbility> abilities;
  long base_experience;
  long height;
  List<DetailedMove> moves;
}

@Data
class DetailedAbility {
  Ability ability;
}

@Data
class Ability {
  String name;
}

@Data
class DetailedMove {
  Move move;
}

@Data
class Move {
  String name;
}
```
::

### Runnable Task

We will refactor the java file from `Example.java` to `Fetch.java`.

> In this file, we will put in the appropriate schema for the plugin, and for the inputs and output of the plugin. This will help in generating proper documentation for the plugin. We would also put in examples so that any user can get help in understanding how to use the plugin.

Author: ```suggestion
In this file, we will put in the appropriate schema for the plugin, and for the inputs and output of the plugin. This will help in generating proper documentation for the plugin. We will also put in examples so that any user can get help in understanding how to use the plugin.
```

---
title: How to Build Custom Plugin in Kestra
icon: /docs/icons/tutorial.svg
---

In this tutorial, we will be building a custom plugin in Kestra.

## Use-case for Custom Plugin

We will be building a plugin that fetches the data for a given pokemon. We will use the API provided by [PokeAPI.co](https://pokeapi.co/) to fetch the pokemon's details: `https://pokeapi.co/api/v2/pokemon/{pokemon_name}`.

> The API provides the detailed information about any pokemon. We would be fetching a few fields from this information like the ability names, base experience, height and the move names, and showcase it in the output of our plugin. The plugin task would accept the pokemon name, and return these selected fields in the output. This is how the task should look like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The API provides detailed information about any pokemon. We will fetch a few fields like the ability names, base experience, height and move names, and showcase it in the output of our plugin. The plugin task will accept the pokemon name, and return the selected fields in the output. This is how the task should look:
```

## Gradle Configuration

We use [Gradle](https://gradle.org/) as a build tool.

### Mandatory configuration

The first thing we need to configure is the plugin name and the class package.

1. Change in `settings.gradle` the `rootProject.name = 'plugin-template'` with the plugin name `rootProject.name = 'plugin-pokemon'`.
2. Change the class package: by default, the template provides a package `io.kestra.plugin.templates`, just rename the `templates` folder in `src/main/java` & `src/test/java` to `pokemon`. And change the first line in `Example.java`, `ExampleRunnerTest.java` and `ExampleTest.java` to `package io.kestra.plugin.pokemon;`.
3. In `build.gradle`: 
   a. replace `description 'Plugin template for Kestra'` to the package name `description 'Plugin pokemon for Kestra'`.
   b. In the `dependencies` section, add a dependency which we will be using in our plugin task:
    `implementation group: 'com.googlecode.json-simple', name: 'json-simple', version: '1.1.1'` 
   c. Change the `jar` section to the following:

>     ```groovy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```groovy
```

>     jar {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
jar {
```

>         manifest {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    manifest {
```

>             attributes(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        attributes(
```

>                     "X-Kestra-Name": project.name,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                "X-Kestra-Name": project.name,
```

>                     "X-Kestra-Title": "Pokemon",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                "X-Kestra-Title": "Pokemon",
```

>                     "X-Kestra-Group": project.group + ".pokemon",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                "X-Kestra-Group": project.group + ".pokemon",
```

>                     "X-Kestra-Description": project.description,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                "X-Kestra-Description": project.description,
```

>                     "X-Kestra-Version": project.version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                "X-Kestra-Version": project.version
```

>             )

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        )
```

>         }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    }
```

>     }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
}
```

>     ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
```

## Develop Fetch Task

### Create Pokemon class

> In `src/main/java/io/kestra/plugin/pokemon`, we will create a new class `Pokemon.java`. This will be used to map the JSON output of the pokemon API to the Java class. We can put in only those fields that we are interested in, and ignore the rest.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In `src/main/java/io/kestra/plugin/pokemon`, we will create a new class `Pokemon.java`. This will be used to map the JSON output of the pokemon API to the Java class. We only need to add the fields that we are interested in, and ignore the rest.
```

::collapse{title="Here is how the Pokemon.java file should look like"}
```java
package io.kestra.plugin.pokemon;

import java.util.*;
import lombok.*;

@Data
public class Pokemon {
  List<DetailedAbility> abilities;
  long base_experience;
  long height;
  List<DetailedMove> moves;
}

@Data
class DetailedAbility {
  Ability ability;
}

@Data
class Ability {
  String name;
}

@Data
class DetailedMove {
  Move move;
}

@Data
class Move {
  String name;
}
```
::

### Runnable Task

We will refactor the java file from `Example.java` to `Fetch.java`.

> In this file, we will put in the appropriate schema for the plugin, and for the inputs and output of the plugin. This will help in generating proper documentation for the plugin. We will also put in examples so that any user can get help in understanding how to use the plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this file, we will put in the appropriate schema for the plugin, and for the inputs and output of the plugin. This will help in generating proper documentation for the plugin. We will also put in examples so that any user can get help in understanding how to use the plugin.
```
```suggestion
In this file, we will put in the appropriate schema for the plugin, including the inputs and output of the plugin. This will help us generate documentation for the plugin too. Also, we will also include a few examples to help users understand how to use the plugin.
```

            title = "Whether the ability is hidden."
        )
        private final long baseExperience;
        @Schema(
            title = "Slot corresponding to the ability."
        )
        private final long height;
        @Schema(
            title = "Slot corresponding to the ability."
        )
        private final List<String> moves;
    }
}
```
::

### Compile the plugin

Now that the plugin is developed, let us see how we can package it and test it on Kestra instance. Use the included Gradle task to build the plugin.

To build your plugin, execute the `./gradlew shadowJar` command from the plugin directory.

The resulting JAR file will be generated in the `build/libs` directory.

To use this plugin in your Kestra instance, add this JAR to the [Kestra plugins path](/docs/administrator-guide/server-cli#plugins-directory).

## Writing unit tests

Let us refactor the file names from `ExampleRunnerTest.java` and `ExampleTest.java` to `FetchRunnerTest.java` and `FetchTest.java` respectively. Under the `tests/resources/flows` folder, we have a file `example.yaml`, which we will rename to `pokemonFetch.yaml`.

Let us use a relevant flow in `pokemonFetch.yaml`.

> ::collapse{title="Here is how the pokemonFetch.yaml should look"}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::collapse{title="Contents of pokemonFetch.yaml"}
```

> ::collapse{title="Here is how the pokemonFetch.yaml should look like"}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::collapse{title="Here is how the pokemonFetch.yaml should look"}
```

```yaml
id: pokemonFetch
namespace: io.kestra.plugin

tasks:
- id: fetch-pikachu
  type: io.kestra.plugin.pokemon.Fetch
  pokemon: "pikachu"
- id: fetch-gengar
  type: io.kestra.plugin.pokemon.Fetch
  pokemon: "gengar"
```
::

Let us now amend the `FetchRunnerTest.java`. In this test, we try to load the flow file `pokemonFetch.yaml`, and run this flow. We then test if all the tasks in this flow were executed.

> ::collapse{title="Here are the contents of FetchRunnerTest.java file"}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::collapse{title="Contents of FetchRunnerTest.java"}
```

import java.util.concurrent.TimeoutException;

import static org.hamcrest.MatcherAssert.assertThat;
import static org.hamcrest.Matchers.hasSize;
import static org.hamcrest.Matchers.is;

/**
 * This test will load all flow located in `src/test/resources/flows/`
 * and will run an in-memory runner to be able to test a full flow. There is also a
 * configuration file in `src/test/resources/application.yml` that is only for the full runner
 * test to configure in-memory runner.
 */
@MicronautTest
class FetchRunnerTest {
    @Inject
    protected MemoryRunner runner;

    @Inject
    protected RunnerUtils runnerUtils;

    @Inject
    protected LocalFlowRepositoryLoader repositoryLoader;

    @BeforeEach
    protected void init() throws IOException, URISyntaxException {
        repositoryLoader.load(Objects.requireNonNull(FetchRunnerTest.class.getClassLoader().getResource("flows")));
        this.runner.run();
    }

    @SuppressWarnings("unchecked")
    @Test
    void flow() throws TimeoutException {
        Execution execution = runnerUtils.runOne(null, "io.kestra.plugin", "pokemonFetch");

        assertThat(execution.getTaskRunList(), hasSize(2));
    }
}
```
::

> Let us now test the actual logic of the plugin in `FetchTest.java`. Here, we are creating the input and invoking the logic present in the task, and then verifying the output as returned by the task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let’s test the actual logic of the plugin in `FetchTest.java`. Here, we are creating the input and invoking the logic present in the task, and then verifying the output returned by the task.
```

> ::collapse{title="Here are the contents of FetchTest.java file"}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::collapse{title="Contents of FetchTest.java"}
```

import io.micronaut.test.extensions.junit5.annotation.MicronautTest;
import org.apache.commons.lang3.StringUtils;
import org.junit.jupiter.api.Test;
import io.kestra.core.runners.RunContext;
import io.kestra.core.runners.RunContextFactory;

import jakarta.inject.Inject;

import static org.hamcrest.MatcherAssert.assertThat;
import static org.hamcrest.Matchers.is;

/**
 * This test will only test the main task, this allow you to send any input
 * parameters to your task and test the returning behaviour easily.
 */
@MicronautTest
class FetchTest {
    @Inject
    private RunContextFactory runContextFactory;

    @Test
    void run() throws Exception {
        RunContext runContext = runContextFactory.of(ImmutableMap.of("variable", "gengar"));

        Fetch task = Fetch.builder()
            .pokemon("{{ variable }}")
            .build();

        Fetch.Output runOutput = task.run(runContext);
        assertThat(runOutput.getBaseExperience(), is(250L));
        assertThat(runOutput.getHeight(), is(15L));
        assertThat(runOutput.getAbilities().size(), is(1));
        assertThat(runOutput.getMoves().size(), is(123));
    }
}
```
::

### Running the tests

> You can run the tests from Intellij IDE, or from terminal using the command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can run the tests from Intellij IDE, or from the terminal using the command:
```
